Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the arterial system and the regulation of arterial blood pressure.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the functions of the arterial system and the Windkessel effect.
The arterial system carries blood from the heart to the tissues,
but it is far more than a set of passive pipes;
its elastic properties perform a vital function.
The large arteries, such as the aorta, have walls rich in elastin,
making them highly compliant, or distensible.
This underlies the Windkessel effect, which converts the intermittent,
pulsatile output of the heart into a more continuous flow to the tissues.
During systole, as the ventricle ejects,
the elastic aorta and great arteries distend,
storing a portion of the stroke volume and its energy in their stretched walls,
so that not all the ejected blood passes onward at once.
During diastole, when the heart is not ejecting, these stretched walls recoil,
squeezing the stored blood onward and maintaining flow and pressure through
diastole. Without this, flow would cease between beats and the pressure would swing
wildly.
So the arterial system distributes blood to the tissues,
and through the Windkessel effect of its compliant elastic large arteries —
distending to store blood in systole and recoiling to maintain flow in diastole —
it smooths the heart's pulsatile output into more continuous tissue flow,
cushioning the pressure swings; a function lost as the arteries stiffen with age.
Define the components of arterial blood pressure and their determinants.
Arterial blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the arterial walls,
and it is described by several values through the cardiac cycle.
The systolic pressure is the peak pressure during ventricular ejection;
the diastolic pressure is the trough during diastole, before the next ejection.
The difference between them is the pulse pressure.
The mean arterial pressure is the average pressure over the cycle,
and because diastole is longer than systole it is nearer the diastolic,
approximated as the diastolic plus a third of the pulse pressure.
The mean arterial pressure is the more important for tissue perfusion,
since it is the driving pressure.
Its determinants follow from the relationship that the mean arterial pressure
equals the cardiac output times the systemic vascular resistance — the circulatory
equivalent of Ohm's law.
The pulse pressure, by contrast, is determined by the stroke volume and the
compliance of the arteries.
So arterial blood pressure comprises the systolic peak, the diastolic trough,
their difference the pulse pressure,
and the mean — the driving pressure for perfusion,
equal to cardiac output times systemic vascular resistance;
while the pulse pressure depends on the stroke volume and arterial compliance — a
framework central to understanding and managing blood pressure.
Explain the relationship between mean arterial pressure,
cardiac output and resistance.
The relationship between pressure, flow and resistance in the circulation is the
analogue of Ohm's law in electricity,
and it is fundamental to understanding blood pressure.
Ohm's law states that flow equals the pressure difference divided by the
resistance; rearranged for the circulation,
the pressure difference driving flow equals the flow times the resistance.
Applied to the systemic circulation,
the mean arterial pressure — strictly the difference between the mean arterial and
the central venous pressure, but the venous pressure being low it is approximated
by the mean arterial pressure — equals the cardiac output times the systemic
vascular resistance.
This is the central equation of blood-pressure control:
the mean arterial pressure is the product of how much blood the heart pumps and how
constricted the systemic vessels are.
It shows that pressure can be changed by altering either the cardiac output or the
resistance, which is precisely how the body, and the anaesthetist, regulate it.
The systemic vascular resistance is itself governed, by Poiseuille's relationship,
chiefly by the radius of the arterioles.
So, by the circulatory form of Ohm's law,
the mean arterial pressure equals the cardiac output times the systemic vascular
resistance — pressure being the product of flow and resistance — the central
relationship showing that blood pressure is regulated by adjusting cardiac output
or vascular resistance, the latter set mainly by arteriolar radius.
Describe the arterial pressure waveform and how it changes through the arterial
tree.
The arterial pressure waveform is the shape traced by the pressure as it varies
through the cardiac cycle, and it has a characteristic form that changes as it
travels from the aorta to the periphery.
At the aortic root, the waveform shows a sharp upstroke as ejection begins,
rising to the systolic peak, then a decline as ejection wanes,
interrupted by the dicrotic notch — the small deflection marking the closure of the
aortic valve — followed by a gradual fall through diastole to the diastolic
pressure.
As the wave travels distally through the arterial tree, it changes:
the systolic peak becomes higher and sharper, the upstroke steeper,
the dicrotic notch becomes a smoother dicrotic wave appearing later,
and the pulse pressure widens — so a peripheral arterial trace shows a higher
systolic pressure than the central.
This distal amplification arises from the tapering and stiffening of the arteries
and the reflection of pressure waves from the periphery.
The mean pressure, however, falls only slightly until the arterioles.
So the arterial pressure waveform shows a systolic upstroke and peak,
the dicrotic notch of aortic valve closure, and a diastolic decline;
travelling distally, the systolic peak rises and sharpens and the pulse pressure
widens — peripheral amplification from arterial tapering,
stiffening and wave reflection — while the mean pressure is largely preserved until
the arterioles.
How does arterial compliance change with age, and what are the consequences?
Arterial compliance — the distensibility of the arteries,
the change in volume for a change in pressure — declines with age,
as the elastic arteries stiffen, with important consequences for blood pressure.
With ageing, the elastin of the large arterial walls degenerates and is replaced by
stiffer collagen, and other changes reduce the compliance,
so the aorta and great arteries become stiffer and less distensible.
The consequences follow from the Windkessel function and the pulse pressure.
With stiffer arteries, the Windkessel cushioning is impaired,
so the same stroke volume causes a greater rise in systolic pressure — because the
artery cannot accommodate the ejected volume — and a greater fall in diastolic
pressure, since there is less recoil to maintain it;
the result is a widened pulse pressure with a raised systolic and a lowered or
maintained diastolic pressure, the characteristic isolated systolic hypertension of
the elderly.
The raised systolic pressure increases the cardiac workload and afterload.
So arterial compliance falls with age as the elastic arteries stiffen,
impairing the Windkessel effect; the consequence is a widened pulse pressure with
raised systolic and reduced diastolic pressure — isolated systolic hypertension —
increasing cardiac workload, a common and important feature in the elderly surgical
patient.
Describe the baroreceptor reflex.
The baroreceptor reflex is the principal mechanism for the rapid,
moment-to-moment regulation of arterial blood pressure,
a negative-feedback reflex that buffers changes in pressure within seconds.
The sensors are the baroreceptors — stretch receptors in the walls of the carotid
sinus and the aortic arch — which detect the arterial pressure by the stretch it
produces, increasing their firing as pressure rises.
Their afferents travel to the cardiovascular centres in the medulla.
When the pressure rises, the increased baroreceptor firing causes the centres to
reduce sympathetic outflow and increase parasympathetic, vagal outflow,
which lowers the heart rate, contractility,
vascular tone and venous tone — reducing the cardiac output and the systemic
vascular resistance, and so bringing the pressure back down.
When pressure falls, the reverse occurs:
reduced baroreceptor firing increases sympathetic and decreases vagal activity,
raising heart rate, contractility and vascular tone to restore the pressure — as on
standing, preventing a fall.
So the baroreceptor reflex regulates blood pressure rapidly by negative feedback:
carotid and aortic stretch receptors sense the pressure and,
through the medullary centres, adjust the autonomic balance — a rise reducing
sympathetic and raising vagal activity to lower pressure,
and a fall doing the reverse — buffering pressure within seconds, as on standing.
Describe the other reflexes regulating blood pressure.
Besides the baroreceptor reflex, several other reflexes contribute to
cardiovascular regulation, responding to different stimuli.
The peripheral chemoreceptors, in the carotid and aortic bodies,
primarily sensing oxygen, carbon dioxide and pH, also influence the circulation:
severe hypoxia or hypercapnia stimulates them to raise sympathetic outflow and
pressure.
The central chemoreceptors and, in extremis,
the central nervous system ischaemic response act when the brain itself is
underperfused: a severely low cerebral blood flow causes a powerful sympathetic
discharge raising the pressure markedly — the Cushing response when intracranial
pressure rises.
The cardiopulmonary, or low-pressure,
receptors in the atria and great veins sense the filling, or volume,
and adjust heart rate and fluid handling — the Bainbridge reflex increasing heart
rate with atrial filling, and atrial stretch influencing the release of natriuretic
peptide and antidiuretic hormone.
So besides the baroreceptors, blood pressure is regulated by the peripheral
chemoreceptors raising pressure in hypoxia and hypercapnia,
the central nervous system ischaemic response and Cushing reflex defending cerebral
perfusion, and the cardiopulmonary volume receptors adjusting rate and fluid
handling — a set of reflexes complementing the baroreceptor reflex in the
integrated control of the circulation.
Describe the longer-term regulation of blood pressure.
While the baroreceptor and other reflexes give rapid control,
they adapt over time and cannot set the long-term level of blood pressure;
this is governed by mechanisms controlling the blood volume, centred on the kidney.
The principal long-term regulator is the relationship between pressure and the
renal handling of salt and water, known as pressure natriuresis:
a rise in arterial pressure increases the renal excretion of sodium and water,
reducing the blood volume and so the pressure, while a fall reduces excretion,
retaining fluid and restoring pressure — a powerful feedback that,
over hours and days, returns pressure towards a set level.
This is modulated by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
activated when renal perfusion falls,
which raises pressure by vasoconstriction through angiotensin and by sodium and
water retention through aldosterone;
and by antidiuretic hormone and the natriuretic peptides.
These hormonal and renal mechanisms set the long-term blood pressure by controlling
the volume.
So the longer-term regulation of blood pressure is governed by the kidney's control
of blood volume — pressure natriuresis adjusting salt and water excretion to
pressure — modulated by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
antidiuretic hormone and the natriuretic peptides;
volume-based mechanisms that set the chronic level of pressure,
complementing the rapid reflexes.
What is the relevance of arterial pressure regulation to anaesthesia?
The regulation of arterial pressure is of constant relevance to anaesthesia,
because maintaining an adequate perfusion pressure is essential and because
anaesthesia profoundly disturbs the regulating mechanisms.
Anaesthetic agents commonly cause hypotension,
by reducing vascular tone and venous return, depressing contractility,
and — importantly — by blunting the baroreceptor reflex,
so that the normal compensatory tachycardia and vasoconstriction in response to a
fall in pressure are impaired, leaving the patient vulnerable.
The framework guides management: since mean arterial pressure is cardiac output
times systemic vascular resistance,
hypotension is treated by addressing the cause — fluids for low preload,
vasopressors to raise resistance, inotropes for poor contractility.
Maintaining the mean arterial pressure protects the perfusion of vital organs,
the brain, heart and kidneys, whose autoregulation may be impaired or shifted.
So arterial pressure regulation is central to anaesthesia:
anaesthetic agents cause hypotension and blunt the baroreceptor reflex,
and the anaesthetist maintains perfusion pressure using the
cardiac-output-and-resistance framework — fluids,
vasopressors and inotropes — to protect vital-organ perfusion,
making blood-pressure management a continuous responsibility.
Pull it together: how is arterial blood pressure maintained?
I would draw it together around blood pressure as a tightly regulated variable,
maintained at the level needed to perfuse the tissues by the control of its two
determinants over multiple timescales.
The mean arterial pressure is the product of the cardiac output and the systemic
vascular resistance, and the arterial system's compliance,
through the Windkessel effect, smooths the pulsatile output and shapes the pulse
pressure.
The pressure is regulated, first, rapidly, within seconds,
by the baroreceptor reflex and the other neural reflexes,
which adjust the autonomic control of heart rate, contractility,
vascular tone and venous tone to buffer changes — as on standing.
It is regulated, second, over the longer term,
by the renal and hormonal control of blood volume — pressure natriuresis and the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system — which set the chronic level.
These mechanisms are disturbed by disease, by ageing, and by anaesthesia.
So arterial blood pressure is maintained by regulating its determinants — cardiac
output and vascular resistance — through the rapid neural reflexes,
chiefly the baroreceptor reflex adjusting the autonomic balance,
and the longer-term renal and hormonal control of blood volume — an integrated,
multi-timescale system that defends the perfusion of the tissues and which
anaesthesia must support.
Describe the structure of the vascular tree and how it suits function.
The blood vessels form a tree whose structure changes along its length,
each segment built for its function. The large elastic arteries,
the aorta and its main branches, have walls rich in elastin,
making them compliant for the Windkessel function of smoothing pulsatile flow.
The medium muscular arteries, distributing blood, have more smooth muscle.
The arterioles, the small resistance vessels,
have a thick coat of smooth muscle relative to their narrow lumen,
and it is their adjustable calibre that provides most of the systemic vascular
resistance and controls flow into the tissues.
The capillaries are a single endothelial layer for exchange.
The venules and veins, on the return side, are thin-walled and highly distensible,
serving as the capacitance reservoir holding most of the blood volume.
All vessels share a lining of endothelium.
So the vascular tree runs from the compliant elastic arteries that smooth flow,
through the muscular distributing arteries,
to the muscular arterioles that provide resistance and control flow,
the thin exchange capillaries, and the distensible venules and veins that store
blood — each segment's wall structure matched to its function of conduction,
resistance, exchange or capacitance.
Explain how Poiseuille's relationship governs vascular resistance.
The resistance to blood flow through a vessel is governed by the factors expressed
in Poiseuille's relationship, which describes the steady laminar flow of a fluid
through a tube, and it explains why the arterioles are the principal resistance
vessels.
The relationship states that the flow through a tube is proportional to the
pressure gradient and to the fourth power of the radius,
and inversely proportional to the length of the tube and the viscosity of the fluid.
The resistance, correspondingly, is proportional to the length and the viscosity
and inversely proportional to the fourth power of the radius.
The crucial term is the radius raised to the fourth power:
because resistance varies so steeply with radius,
small changes in vessel calibre produce large changes in resistance and flow —
halving the radius increases the resistance sixteen-fold.
This is why the arterioles, which can change their radius through their smooth
muscle, are the main controllers of resistance and of the distribution of flow.
So Poiseuille's relationship shows that flow is proportional to the pressure
gradient and the fourth power of the radius and inversely to length and viscosity;
the fourth-power dependence on radius means small changes in arteriolar calibre
greatly alter resistance — making the arterioles the principal resistance vessels
controlling flow, though blood's non-Newtonian nature means the relationship is an
approximation.
Distinguish laminar from turbulent flow and its relevance.
Blood normally flows through vessels in a laminar, or streamlined, manner,
but under certain conditions the flow becomes turbulent,
which has physical and clinical consequences.
In laminar flow, the blood moves in smooth, concentric layers, or laminae,
the layer at the wall being almost stationary and the velocity greatest in the
centre — a parabolic velocity profile; this flow is silent and efficient.
Turbulent flow is disorderly, with eddies and mixing,
occurring when the velocity is high, the vessel wide, the viscosity low,
or where the vessel is irregular or branches;
the tendency to turbulence is predicted by the Reynolds number,
a dimensionless quantity combining these factors,
turbulence becoming likely above a critical value.
Turbulence is important because it is less efficient — requiring a greater pressure
gradient for a given flow — and because it generates sound,
the basis of the murmurs of cardiac and vascular disease and of the Korotkoff
sounds used to measure blood pressure.
So laminar flow is smooth, layered, silent and efficient, with a parabolic profile,
whereas turbulent flow is disordered, noisy and less efficient,
occurring at high velocity, low viscosity or vessel irregularity,
predicted by the Reynolds number; its relevance lies in the sounds it generates —
murmurs and the Korotkoff sounds of blood-pressure measurement.
Describe how arterial blood pressure is measured.
Arterial blood pressure is measured by both non-invasive and invasive methods,
resting on different principles.
The traditional non-invasive method is auscultatory:
a cuff is inflated around the arm above the systolic pressure,
occluding the artery, then slowly deflated while listening over the artery;
as the pressure falls below the systolic,
blood begins to spurt through turbulently,
generating the Korotkoff sounds — the first appearance of sound marking the
systolic pressure, and the disappearance of sound,
as flow becomes continuous and laminar, marking the diastolic.
The automated oscillometric devices in common use measure the oscillations
transmitted to the cuff as it deflates,
the point of maximal oscillation corresponding to the mean arterial pressure,
from which the systolic and diastolic are derived.
The invasive method, for continuous and accurate measurement in the seriously ill
or major surgery, places a cannula directly in an artery,
connected to a transducer that converts the pressure into an electrical signal
displayed as the arterial waveform.
So arterial pressure is measured non-invasively by the auscultatory method using
the Korotkoff sounds of turbulent flow,
and by automated oscillometry detecting cuff oscillations to find the mean;
and invasively by an intra-arterial cannula and transducer giving a continuous
waveform — methods of differing accuracy and invasiveness suited to the clinical
need.
Describe the distribution of blood volume and pressure around the circulation.
The blood volume and the pressure are distributed very unevenly around the
circulation, in a way that reflects the functions of the different segments.
Considering the volume: the majority of the blood, around two-thirds,
is held on the venous side — the veins and venules — which act as the capacitance
reservoir; the systemic arteries hold only around fifteen per cent,
the capillaries a small fraction, and the pulmonary circulation and heart the
remainder.
Considering the pressure: the pressure is highest and most pulsatile in the aorta
and large arteries; it falls only a little along the arteries,
then falls steeply across the arterioles — the main site of resistance — so that
the pressure entering the capillaries is much lower and the pulsatility largely
damped; it falls further and gradually through the capillaries and veins to reach a
low value at the right atrium.
So most of the blood volume resides in the venous capacitance vessels,
while the pressure is high in the arteries,
falls steeply across the resistance arterioles,
and is low in the capillaries and veins — the steep arteriolar pressure drop
reflecting their role as resistance vessels,
and the venous volume their role as the reservoir;
an arrangement central to understanding the circulation.
Describe the chemoreceptor influence on the circulation.
The peripheral chemoreceptors, though primarily concerned with the control of
breathing, also exert effects on the circulation,
particularly in extreme conditions, contributing to cardiovascular regulation.
The chemoreceptors are located in the carotid and aortic bodies,
sensing the arterial partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide and the pH;
they are stimulated by a low oxygen, a high carbon dioxide, and a low pH.
When strongly stimulated, as by severe hypoxaemia,
they reflexly increase the sympathetic outflow to the circulation,
causing vasoconstriction and a rise in blood pressure,
alongside their primary effect of stimulating ventilation.
This chemoreceptor reflex becomes an important support of the blood pressure in
severe hypoxia and in situations such as severe haemorrhage,
where the falling pressure and flow reduce oxygen delivery to the chemoreceptors
and stimulate them, reinforcing the pressor response.
There is also an interaction with the respiratory effects on the heart rate.
So the peripheral chemoreceptors, sensing hypoxia, hypercapnia and acidosis,
contribute to circulatory control by reflexly increasing sympathetic outflow and
raising blood pressure when strongly stimulated,
supporting the pressure in severe hypoxia and haemorrhage — a reflex that
complements the baroreceptor reflex,
particularly in extreme conditions threatening oxygen delivery.
Describe the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in blood-pressure control.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is a hormonal cascade central to the
longer-term control of blood pressure and of extracellular volume,
activated when the blood pressure or the perfusion of the kidney falls.
The trigger is the release of the enzyme renin from the kidney,
in response to a fall in renal perfusion pressure,
a fall in the sodium delivered to the tubule, or increased sympathetic activity.
Renin acts on angiotensinogen from the liver to form angiotensin one,
which is converted, chiefly in the lung by the angiotensin-converting enzyme,
to the active angiotensin two.
Angiotensin two raises the blood pressure by several actions:
it is a potent vasoconstrictor, raising the systemic vascular resistance;
it stimulates the release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex,
which promotes renal sodium and water retention, expanding the blood volume;
it promotes the release of antidiuretic hormone and thirst;
and it has direct renal effects retaining sodium.
So the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
activated by a fall in renal perfusion or pressure, generates angiotensin two,
which raises blood pressure by vasoconstriction and,
through aldosterone and other actions,
by sodium and water retention expanding the volume — a key hormonal system in the
longer-term regulation of pressure and volume,
and an important target of antihypertensive drugs.
Describe the regulation of the pulmonary circulation and how it differs from the
systemic.
The pulmonary circulation, carrying the whole cardiac output through the lungs,
differs from the systemic circulation in several important respects suiting it to
gas exchange.
It is a low-pressure, low-resistance system:
the pulmonary arterial pressure is far lower than the systemic, around a quarter,
because the pulmonary vessels are thin-walled, short and distensible,
offering little resistance; this protects the thin alveolar membrane and matches
the low pressure to the needs of gas exchange.
It is highly distensible and can recruit and distend vessels to accommodate
increased flow, as in exercise, with little rise in pressure.
Its most distinctive regulatory feature is hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction:
in contrast to the systemic vessels, which dilate in hypoxia,
the pulmonary arterioles constrict in response to a low alveolar oxygen,
diverting blood away from poorly ventilated regions towards better ventilated ones,
thereby improving the matching of ventilation to perfusion.
So the pulmonary circulation is a low-pressure, low-resistance,
distensible system suited to gas exchange,
differing from the systemic in its low pressure and in hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction — the pulmonary vessels constricting rather than dilating in
hypoxia to match perfusion to ventilation;
features important in respiratory physiology and anaesthesia.
Summarise the integrated regulation of the systemic circulation.
I would draw it together around the circulation as a system regulated to achieve
two ends simultaneously: maintaining an adequate arterial pressure to perfuse all
organs, and distributing the flow between organs according to their needs.
The arterial pressure, the product of cardiac output and systemic vascular
resistance, is regulated rapidly by the neural reflexes — chiefly the baroreceptor
reflex, with chemoreceptor and other contributions — adjusting the autonomic
control of the heart and vessels, and over the longer term by the renal and
hormonal control of blood volume through pressure natriuresis and the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
The distribution of flow is governed locally,
each tissue setting its own flow by autoregulation and metabolic control of its
arterioles, while the systemic sympathetic control can override this to
redistribute flow and defend pressure, as in exercise or haemorrhage.
The venous capacitance adjusts cardiac filling.
So the systemic circulation is regulated to maintain arterial pressure — by the
rapid neural reflexes and the slower renal-hormonal volume control — while
distributing flow by local autoregulation overridden when necessary by systemic
sympathetic control; an integrated system balancing the perfusion of the whole
against the needs of each part, which anaesthesia must understand and support.
Describe the control of blood pressure on standing — the orthostatic response.
On standing from lying, gravity causes blood to pool in the dependent veins of the
legs and abdomen, reducing venous return,
and the body must respond at once to prevent a fall in cerebral perfusion,
so the orthostatic response is a brisk reflex correction.
On standing, the venous pooling reduces venous return and so,
by the Frank-Starling mechanism, the stroke volume and cardiac output,
tending to lower the arterial pressure.
This fall is sensed immediately by the arterial baroreceptors,
which reduce their firing, triggering the baroreflex:
the sympathetic outflow increases and the parasympathetic decreases,
raising the heart rate and contractility and, importantly,
constricting the resistance and capacitance vessels,
which raises systemic vascular resistance and restores venous return.
The pressure is thus rapidly corrected within seconds.
Failure of this response — from autonomic impairment,
drugs or hypovolaemia — causes orthostatic hypotension,
with dizziness or syncope on standing.
So the orthostatic response corrects the fall in pressure caused by venous pooling
on standing: the baroreflex increases sympathetic and decreases parasympathetic
activity, raising rate, contractility and vascular tone to restore venous return
and pressure; its failure causing orthostatic hypotension,
relevant to anaesthesia where drugs and hypovolaemia impair it.
Describe the Valsalva manoeuvre and its phases.
The Valsalva manoeuvre — forced expiration against a closed glottis,
raising intrathoracic pressure — produces a characteristic four-phase change in
arterial pressure and heart rate that is a valuable test of the integrity of the
baroreflex and the autonomic nervous system.
In phase one, at the onset of straining,
the raised intrathoracic pressure is transmitted to the aorta,
transiently raising the arterial pressure.
In phase two, during sustained straining,
the raised intrathoracic pressure impedes venous return,
so the cardiac output and pressure fall;
the baroreflex responds with tachycardia and vasoconstriction,
partly restoring the pressure.
In phase three, on release, the pressure briefly drops further as the intrathoracic
pressure falls and the pulmonary vessels refill.
In phase four, the restored venous return,
ejected into a constricted arterial tree,
causes an overshoot of pressure above baseline,
which the baroreflex corrects with a reflex bradycardia.
So the Valsalva manoeuvre produces four phases — an initial rise from transmitted
pressure, a fall with reflex tachycardia and vasoconstriction during straining,
a further drop on release, and an overshoot with reflex bradycardia — the pattern
testing the baroreflex and autonomic function,
its blunting indicating autonomic dysfunction.
Describe the pathophysiology of systemic hypertension.
Systemic hypertension is a sustained elevation of the arterial blood pressure above
defined thresholds, and understanding it follows from the determinants of pressure
— that the mean arterial pressure is the product of cardiac output and systemic
vascular resistance.
In the great majority of cases the hypertension is primary, or essential,
with no single identifiable cause but a multifactorial origin — genetic
predisposition, and environmental factors such as salt intake,
obesity and ageing — the haemodynamic hallmark in established disease being an
increased systemic vascular resistance from narrowed,
remodelled resistance vessels, with a normal or low cardiac output.
Contributing mechanisms include increased sympathetic activity,
activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
renal sodium handling shifting the pressure-natriuresis relationship,
and endothelial dysfunction.
A minority have secondary hypertension,
from an identifiable cause such as renal disease,
endocrine disorders or coarctation. Sustained hypertension damages the heart,
vessels, kidneys, brain and eyes.
So hypertension is a sustained rise in arterial pressure,
mostly primary and multifactorial, its hallmark a raised systemic vascular
resistance from remodelled vessels, driven by sympathetic, renin-angiotensin,
renal and endothelial mechanisms, with a minority secondary to identifiable causes
— a condition causing widespread end-organ damage and of major perioperative
relevance.
Describe the invasive measurement of arterial pressure and the concept of damping.
Invasive arterial pressure measurement,
by a cannula in an artery connected through a fluid-filled tube to a transducer,
gives a continuous, beat-to-beat pressure and waveform,
but the fluid-filled system has dynamic properties that must be understood to
interpret it correctly.
The column of fluid is a mechanical system with a natural resonant frequency and a
degree of damping. If the system is underdamped, it oscillates excessively,
overshooting so that the systolic pressure reads falsely high and the diastolic
falsely low, with a ringing waveform.
If it is overdamped — from air bubbles, clots,
kinks or compliant tubing — it responds sluggishly,
so the systolic reads falsely low and the diastolic falsely high and the waveform
is blunted, though the mean pressure remains accurate.
Optimal damping gives a faithful waveform.
The dynamic response is tested by the fast-flush test, observing the oscillations.
So invasive arterial measurement depends on the dynamic response of the
fluid-filled system: underdamping overestimates the systolic and gives a ringing
trace, overdamping underestimates the systolic and blunts the trace — though the
mean stays accurate — the response checked by the flush test;
an understanding essential to the correct interpretation of the arterial trace.
Describe pulse pressure variation and its use.
Pulse pressure variation is the cyclical change in the arterial pulse pressure that
occurs during positive-pressure ventilation,
and it is a valuable dynamic indicator of whether a patient will respond to fluid,
resting on the heart-lung interaction and the Frank-Starling principle.
During mechanical ventilation, each positive-pressure breath transiently alters the
filling of the heart: inspiration raises intrathoracic pressure,
which momentarily reduces venous return to the right heart and, after a few beats,
reduces left ventricular filling and so stroke volume and pulse pressure,
which then recover in expiration.
The magnitude of this respiratory swing in pulse pressure depends on where the
ventricles are operating on their Starling curves: if they are on the steep,
preload-dependent part — that is, fluid-responsive — the swings are large;
if on the flat part, the swings are small.
So a large pulse pressure variation predicts that a fluid bolus will increase the
cardiac output. Its assumptions include a regular rhythm and controlled ventilation
with adequate tidal volumes.
So pulse pressure variation is the respiratory swing in pulse pressure during
positive-pressure ventilation, large when the ventricles are on the steep,
fluid-responsive part of the Starling curve and small when not — a dynamic
predictor of fluid responsiveness, valid under controlled ventilation and regular
rhythm, widely used to guide fluid therapy.
Describe arteriosclerosis and the effect of vascular ageing on blood pressure.
The large arteries stiffen with age and disease,
and this has a specific and important effect on the blood pressure that follows
from their Windkessel function.
Arteriosclerosis — the stiffening and loss of elasticity of the arterial wall with
ageing, distinct from atherosclerosis,
the focal lipid plaque disease — reduces the compliance of the aorta and great
arteries.
Because these vessels normally distend in systole to absorb the stroke volume and
recoil in diastole to maintain flow — the Windkessel effect — their stiffening
impairs this buffering: the same stroke volume ejected into a stiff aorta produces
a higher systolic pressure, while the loss of diastolic recoil lowers the diastolic
pressure.
The result is a widened pulse pressure and isolated systolic hypertension,
characteristic of the elderly. Stiffening also increases the speed of the pulse
wave and the early return of reflected waves,
further augmenting the systolic pressure.
So arteriosclerosis, the age-related stiffening of the large arteries,
impairs their Windkessel buffering,
so that a given stroke volume raises the systolic and lowers the diastolic
pressure, widening the pulse pressure and causing isolated systolic hypertension —
the characteristic blood-pressure change of ageing,
with implications for cardiovascular risk and perioperative pressure lability.
Describe the role of nitric oxide and the endothelium in controlling vascular tone.
The endothelium, far from being a passive lining,
is a major active regulator of vascular tone,
continuously releasing vasoactive substances,
of which nitric oxide is the most important,
providing a tonic vasodilator influence.
Nitric oxide is synthesised in the endothelial cells from the amino acid arginine
by the enzyme nitric oxide synthase,
and its production is stimulated by the shear stress of flowing blood and by
various mediators.
Once formed, it diffuses to the underlying vascular smooth muscle,
where it activates the enzyme guanylate cyclase,
raising cyclic guanosine monophosphate,
which causes relaxation and so vasodilatation.
This tonic release sets a background vasodilator tone,
and its flow-dependent release matches vessel calibre to flow;
impaired nitric oxide production — endothelial dysfunction — contributes to
hypertension and atherosclerosis.
The endothelium also produces vasoconstrictors, notably endothelin,
and the prostanoids, balancing tone. Many drugs, such as the nitrates,
act through this nitric oxide pathway.
So nitric oxide, produced by the endothelium from arginine in response to shear
stress, diffuses to the smooth muscle and raises cyclic guanosine monophosphate to
cause vasodilatation, providing a tonic, flow-matched vasodilator tone;
its impairment causing endothelial dysfunction,
and its pathway exploited by drugs — a central mechanism of vascular control.
Describe the effects of anaesthesia on the cardiovascular system and blood pressure.
Anaesthesia profoundly affects the cardiovascular system,
and most anaesthetic agents tend to lower the arterial pressure by acting on the
determinants we have discussed — the cardiac output and the systemic vascular
resistance — so that hypotension is among the commonest events under anaesthesia.
The intravenous induction agents and the volatile agents generally cause
vasodilatation, reducing systemic vascular resistance,
and many depress myocardial contractility and blunt the baroreflex,
so that the compensatory responses to hypotension are impaired.
Regional anaesthesia, by blocking the sympathetic outflow,
causes vasodilatation and, with higher blocks,
reduces the cardiac sympathetic drive, lowering pressure.
The positive-pressure ventilation often used reduces venous return.
These effects are superimposed on any hypovolaemia and on the patient's own
cardiovascular disease and medications. The anaesthetist therefore anticipates and
manages hypotension with fluids and vasoactive drugs.
So anaesthesia lowers blood pressure through vasodilatation reducing systemic
vascular resistance, depression of contractility, blunting of the baroreflex,
sympathetic blockade in regional anaesthesia,
and reduced venous return from ventilation — effects on the very determinants of
pressure, making the understanding and management of anaesthetic hypotension a
central clinical skill.
Describe the classification of shock in terms of the determinants of blood pressure.
Shock is the state of inadequate tissue perfusion and oxygen delivery,
and it is usefully classified by which determinant of the circulation has failed,
since the mean arterial pressure depends on the cardiac output and the systemic
vascular resistance, and the cardiac output on preload, contractility and afterload.
Hypovolaemic shock is due to a loss of circulating volume — from haemorrhage or
fluid loss — reducing the preload and so the cardiac output;
the body compensates with vasoconstriction and tachycardia.
Cardiogenic shock is due to failure of the heart as a pump — reducing the cardiac
output despite adequate filling.
Obstructive shock is due to a mechanical obstruction to the circulation — such as
cardiac tamponade, tension pneumothorax or massive pulmonary embolism — impeding
filling or ejection.
Distributive shock — as in sepsis, anaphylaxis and neurogenic shock — is due to a
loss of vascular tone, reducing systemic vascular resistance and causing
maldistribution, often with a high cardiac output.
So shock is classified by the failed determinant: hypovolaemic, from lost preload;
cardiogenic, from pump failure; obstructive, from mechanical obstruction;
and distributive, from lost vascular tone — a classification derived directly from
the determinants of pressure and flow,
directing the diagnosis and the specific treatment of inadequate perfusion.
Summarise the integrated regulation of arterial blood pressure.
I would draw it together around the arterial blood pressure as a tightly regulated
variable, controlled over different timescales to ensure adequate perfusion of the
tissues, especially the brain and heart.
The pressure is set by the product of the cardiac output and the systemic vascular
resistance, expressed in the relationship analogous to Ohm's law.
It is regulated on three timescales.
The immediate, second-to-second control is neural, by the baroreflex:
the arterial baroreceptors sense the pressure and adjust the sympathetic and
parasympathetic outflow to the heart and vessels,
correcting acute changes — as on standing, or in haemorrhage.
The intermediate control, over minutes to hours,
involves hormonal systems and fluid shifts — the renin-angiotensin system,
the chemoreceptors and others.
The long-term control, over days, is dominated by the kidney's regulation of the
extracellular fluid volume through the pressure-natriuresis relationship and the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
So arterial pressure, the product of cardiac output and systemic vascular
resistance, is regulated by the rapid neural baroreflex,
intermediate hormonal mechanisms, and the long-term renal control of volume — an
integrated, multi-timescale system maintaining perfusion,
whose understanding underlies the management of hypertension,
hypotension and shock in anaesthesia.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The arterial system distributes blood and,
through the Windkessel effect of its compliant elastic large arteries (distending
in systole to store blood, recoiling in diastole to maintain flow),
smooths the heart's pulsatile output into more continuous tissue flow — a function
lost as arteries stiffen with age.
Second, Arterial pressure comprises the systolic peak, diastolic trough,
their difference the pulse pressure,
and the mean — the driving pressure for perfusion;
mean arterial pressure = cardiac output × systemic vascular resistance (the
circulatory Ohm's law), while pulse pressure depends on stroke volume and arterial
compliance; systemic vascular resistance is set mainly by arteriolar radius
(Poiseuille).
3.
The arterial waveform (systolic upstroke and peak,
dicrotic notch of aortic valve closure,
diastolic decline) amplifies distally — higher,
sharper systolic peak and wider pulse pressure — from arterial tapering,
stiffening and wave reflection, while mean pressure is largely preserved until the
arterioles; arterial compliance falls with age,
widening pulse pressure (isolated systolic hypertension) and raising cardiac
workload.
Third, The baroreceptor reflex regulates pressure rapidly by negative feedback:
carotid sinus and aortic arch stretch receptors sense pressure and,
via the medullary centres, adjust the autonomic balance — a rise reducing
sympathetic and raising vagal activity to lower pressure, a fall doing the reverse;
complemented by chemoreceptor, CNS-ischaemic (Cushing) and cardiopulmonary
(Bainbridge, volume) reflexes.
Fourth, Longer-term pressure is set by the kidney's control of blood volume —
pressure natriuresis adjusting salt/water excretion to pressure — modulated by the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, ADH and natriuretic peptides;
anaesthesia causes hypotension and blunts the baroreceptor reflex,
so the anaesthetist maintains perfusion pressure (fluids, vasopressors,
inotropes) using the cardiac-output-and-resistance framework.
Thank you. That concludes the station.